
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 2 
 
to (a conception of) nature that is being explored and tested, and which troubles their 
conceptions of subjectivity in ways that are both disturbing and reassuring to the speaker of 
the text and the reader. As these melancholic expressions and performances are confronted 
by what they call nature, that confrontation in turn facilitates the speaker’s comprehension 
of the deeper philosophical issues from which his melancholia originated. What I am 
referring to here with the term melancholia are expressions of loss, trauma, failure, 
depression and ambivalence which appear in these texts. While these affects should by no 
means be conflated, they all do bear the mark of melancholia even when, as in the case of 
Shelley, melancholia also doubles as mourning in the text. Nature communicates this deeper 
comprehension to the speaker because, as Timothy Morton argues, the speaker’s relationship 
to himself—melancholia—is identical to the subject’s relationship to nature. This 
relationship, this ecology, teaches the subject not only how to approach nature but also how 
to approach the alterity inherent to himself.  
While themes of ecology and melancholia run through many romantic writers, Clare, 
Shelley and Keats stand out, both because of their dominant places in the canon and in spite 
of it. While Clare is the most recent inclusion into the canon, his position is largely due to 
the rise of ecocriticism which I explore below. Despite his reputation as the writer of 
naturalist, pastoral lyrics, the poems I read here are disarming in their unceremonious 
dismantling of subjectivity and the earth it resides in. The lack of scholarly attention to this 
aspect of his oeuvre in addition to its apocalyptic language allow for more important and 
often neglected insights into the eco-critical project that only Timothy Morton’s work on 
“dark ecology” has begun to explore in depth. While neither Keats nor Shelley suffer from a 
lack of scholarship specific issues in the scholarship propelled their inclusion in my 
project—in particular what I judge to be insufficient emphasis on the seriousness of their 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 3 
 
melancholic crises and refusal to resolve them even through the offices of art.   Adonais is 
the longest text discussed here, and the lack of scholarship on the feature that I read as the 
most prominent in the poem—the speaker’s suicidal ideation—forced me to bypass many of 
the incumbent difficulties of the text in order to discuss it. Keats, it is often said by scholars, 
was the least educated of the Romantics, and with some competition from Shelley, the most 
tragic. His work, has not then by extension invested with the same philosophical weight 
Shelley, Coleridge or Wordsworth’s was. I not only wanted to remedy this, but also extend 
eco-critical readings of romantic poetry—and here, too, in particular Morton’s reading of 
dark ecology—to provide a framework by which to comprehend, not minimize or dismiss 
his melancholia. My reading engages this larger project through an exploration of the space 
that arises at the intersection of nature and melancholy in these romantic texts. 
This dissertation is deeply indebted to the paradigm shift ecocriticism has forged 
within literary criticism. Ecocriticism is a dynamic revisionist theory which seeks to 
reconceptualize scenes of human-nonhuman interaction in order to promote ecological 
insights about literature, culture and philosophy. While it today approaches a broad range of 
texts and historical periods, it is no accident that ecocriticism partly originated in the 
scholarship of British romanticism. Scholars have recognized nature as an essential presence 
in romantic poetry since its origin. Whether affirmed or elided, the position of nature in 
romanticism has always existed within a contested space. How one values this has often 
determined the poet’s reputation throughout the 20th century. Two scholars who exemplify 
such trends best are M.H. Abrams and Geoffrey Hartmann, who along with Harold Bloom 
and Earl Wasserman initiated the postwar reappraisal of British romanticism. I single out 
Abrams and Hartman out here because they represent the opposing ways of reading that 
exist within romanticism today, and which we see recur in ecocriticism. While I am not 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 4 
 
suggesting a neat mapping of one critique upon another, interesting parallels do arise, which 
we would do well to make note of.  
 In The Mirror and the Lamp (1953) and Natural Supernaturalism (1971), Abrams 
presents a narrative of romanticism that reads it as a break from the principles of 
neoclassicism through a series of inventions such as ‘biodicy,’ a term he draws from theodicy 
(NS 95). His use of the term ‘biodicy’ which espouses the mechanics of a theological 
narrative, exemplifies Abram’s approach by seeking to produce a body of knowledge based 
on an affirmative, transcendental understanding of humanity (Kirschner 195). Geoffrey 
Hartman’s argues through his readings of William Wordsworth in Wordsworth’s Poetry 1787
1814 and elsewhere for the presence of a dialectic in which the poet negotiates between 
nature and imagination to forge his vision (Fry 541-2). Hartman employs the terms 
apocalypse and akedah to clarify this negotiation. While scenes of apocalypse draw the poet 
towards transcendence, scenes of akedah “bind” the poet to nature (225). Barth reminds the 
reader in his account of Hartman’s work that the poet continually posits scenes of 
apocalypse as akedah in order to “maintain his hold on the natural world” (Hartman 225; 
Barth 27).  While Abrams’ reading presents a secularized narrative of Christian 
transcendence in which the dialectic of nature serves an affirmation of human 
consciousness, Hartman’s articulation of apocalypse and akedah not only accounts for 
nature’s dual powers of creation and destruction but posits a powerful ambivalence that 
paralyzes the poet. While these scholars may seem to have little to do with the insights of 
ecocriticism, they do in fact draw the map by which contemporary scholars find themselves. 
Like Abrams, Bate bases his criticism on an adherence to an affirmative aesthetic ideology, 
while Hartman’s recognition of the poet’s ambivalence looks forward to Morton’s work.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 5 
 
While Jonathan Bate and James McKusick by no means invented ecocriticism, nor 
would claim to, the publication of their books, Song of the Earth and Green Writing: Romanticism 
and Ecology, (both published in 2000) represent for many scholars ecocriticism’s entrance into 
mainstream academic thought. While Wordsworth had again suffered a devaluation of sorts 
at the hands of new historicism, ecocriticism positioned the poet’s relationship to nature as 
central to romanticism and crucial to our contemporary condition. Bate and McKusick 
accomplish this by putting forward readings of Wordsworth, as well as of Clare and others, 
which emphasize the poet’s interest, desire, and need for communion with nature. The 
below passages, both of which critique the picturesque observation of nature-as-art in favor 
of immersion in nature, exemplify their approaches. 
  Bate writes  
Nature is made capable of feeling. The ‘I’ is written out, or rather absorbed into the 
scene….Wordsworthian ‘deep seclusion’ means dissolution of the self from 
perceiving eye into ecologically connected organism. The vocabulary is not confined 
to the language of the eye, the stock in trade of the picturesque gazer…The key 
word—emphasized through Wordsworth’s favourite metrical trick of suspension at 
the line-ending—is ‘connect’. Where the picturesque looks, the ecopoetic connects. 
(145)  
Bate argues against readings of Wordsworth as a picturesque poet of the ‘eye’ which thus 
implied a foregrounding of the text conveying the visual viewpoint of the poet and often 
conventionalized framing of the natural world according to the canons of art. Bate contrasts 
the poet who sees with the (educated) eye to the poet immersed in nature who abandons the 
rhetoric of the picturesque for a “dissolution of the self” (145).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 6 
 
McKusick’s ecocriticism takes Clare as exemplary and approaches Clare from a 
historicist perspective, contextualizing his poetry according to the political, economic and 
scientific events of the period. But he similarly distinguishes Clare’s poetry from the tradition 
of the picturesque, presenting Clare as absolutely original, “unprecedented in the English
speaking world” (82).  He writes  
While Clare rejoices in the beauty of the Earth, he does not primarily see it as 
existing for human purposes, and he resists its appropriation for economic use or 
even aesthetic contemplation. The natural world is not comprised of “resources,” or 
“scenery”; Clare regards himself as a normal participant in the living world around 
him, just another inquisitive mammal going about its daily activities. As a result, his 
poems rarely “set the scene” in the approved picturesque manner; he provides an 
accumulation of close-up details rather than sweeping perspectives. (81) 
Both Bate and McKusick present readings which elide the speaker’s subjectivity to promote 
scenes of blissful immersion or direct engagement in nature. While these are in some ways 
appealing readings of subject-object cohesion, questions arise immediately. In “Green to the 
Very Door?” Paul Fry criticizes Bate for forwarding an “anthropocentric hubris” that suffers 
from a metaphysical view of nature (545). This dependence upon a metaphysical framework 
for understanding nature is what leads me to compare this first-wave of ecocriticism to 
Abram’s humanist paradigms. Both depend upon a metaphysical framework which does 
indeed demand an “anthropocentric hubris” through which to read the world around it 
(545). Ecocritical readings that rely on a positive logic of human immersion in nature do not 
fail because they are written from the poet’s viewpoint—that is all s/he can do, in a way—
but because they refuse to account for nature’s alterity, which creates an insurmountable 
divide between the poet-speaker and nature. We can first intuit accounts of this distance in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 7 
 
the work of Hartman whose articulations of the poet’s negotiations between vision and 
nature parallel Morton’s account of the subject’s paralysis when confronted with the ethical 
demand.  Hartman’s account of Wordsworth looks forward to Morton’s, not because it is 
preoccupied with questions of ecology, but because it openly accounts for the ambivalence 
of the poet in his negotiation between apocalypse and akedah, transcendence and nature.  
Timothy Morton presents his critique of Bate and McKusick’s brand of ecocriticism 
in his 2007 book Ecology without Nature and his 2008 essay “John Clare’s Dark Ecology.” 
While Morton’s reading of John Clare’s poem Lines: “I AM” is a small part of his book, the 
choice of lyric is not accidental. While Bate reads Clare through the work of Gaston 
Bachelard in Song of the Earth, he promotes the same revisionary reading of Clare as 
McKusick, the combined influence of their work effectively guaranteeing the inclusion of 
Clare in the Romantic canon.3 Morton draws a stark contrast to the Clare of McKusick and 
Bate by reading a lyric which lacks an affirming pastoral frame within which the speaker is 
easily subsumed, and instead experiences ambivalence and doubt when confronted with the 
natural world. Morton argues that a poem which thinks ecologically is not one that creates a 
false sense of communion, but instead tarries with the ambivalence the desire for action 
creates while questioning the metaphysical category of nature. His work thus marks a clear 
break from the work of Bate and McKusick. Morton even extends this stripping away of 
metaphysics to include the category of nature itself. He argues that scholars must stop using 
the term Nature as a metaphysical concept because environmental theory must move away 
from a hierarchy of essences to conceiving of the world as a dynamic egalitarian network of 
relations, an ever more expansive ecosystem (“Dark” 179).  
 Morton’s reassessment of nature shares company with the work of fellow 
romanticist Alan Liu. Liu defines nature as a political concept, which lacks any metaphysical 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 8 
 
or organic qualities. He writes, “There is no nature except as it is constituted by acts of 
political definition made possible by particular forms of government” (104). In spite of Liu’s 
radically political definition clearly rooted in new historicism, he shares with Morton the 
desire to obliterate any ideology that would prefer to constrain the organic dynamism of 
ecology in favor of the essentialist category of nature. They effectively argue that we can only 
preserve the “natural” world by destroying the concept of nature rhetorically (EWN 185). 
While I agree with Morton’s anti-essentialist reading of nature, which would effectively 
dismantle our metaphysical binaries, I do not believe that it necessitates an abandonment of 
the very term “nature” which I continue to use throughout this dissertation. Replacing one 
term in favor of another, even of another set of terms, hardly resolves a metaphysical 
quandary.  
Morton’s work functions as an important intervention into contemporary 
ecocriticism which remains dominated by a positive logic of subject immersion in, or union 
with, nature. He argues that the traditional valuation of interconnectedness with nature as an 
ideal is an “ideological fantasy” that in fact impedes our understanding of the environment 
(“Dark” 190). This fantasy inhibits the subject from realizing that while s/he is forever 
organically interconnected to nature, s/he will never have the kind of psychic symbiosis 
naturalists and activists often laud as ideal. Morton argues that ecological insight will not 
occur through immersion, but a more counterintuitive move—through (or in the experience 
of) melancholia. His reading of Clare is exemplary for the larger argument. He reads in the 
Clare text a subjectivity that undermines the ideology of immersion by displaying a severe 
despondency or as Morton terms it, dark ecology, instead. Melancholia epitomizes the 
subject-object relationship because of the subject’s divestment from his/her own life. 
Melancholia acts as a sort of half-death of subjectivity, or a paralysis. Unable to be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 9 
 
authentically present with herself or with nature, the melancholic is thus wounded by both. 
Dark ecology reforms the subject’s relation to nature, and herself.  Melancholy is the 
quintessential model of alterity around which one’s identity narrates itself making it the 
performance of ecology on the level of subjectivity. 
While the theoretical approach of my dissertation as it informs my readings, with 
their teeming discussions of birds and basil, can be accurately described as ecocriticism, it is 
important to elaborate this claim. As I state throughout this dissertation, the ecological 
theory that Timothy Morton elaborates in Ecology without Nature presents a stark contrast 
to the work of those critics to whom we give credit for establishing ecocriticism as crucial to 
romantic studies. While we are by now familiar with Morton’s opposition to subject-object 
immersion, which mimics the construction of the subject’s identity, he goes a step farther by 
challenging his readers to apply the logic of ecology to the concept of identity and 
subjectivity in themselves. Like ‘nature,’ the subject is just a construction, a metaphysical 
category which bears no resemblance to the actions of a person (“John Clare” 175). Morton 
redefines the subject as a “potentially infinite series of alterities” that fragment and unravel 
infinitely (EWN 175). The subject, then, is merely a vessel upon or through which a series of 
performances have taken place and then, qua author, draws on to generate a narrative that 
delineates its boundaries as the supposed coherent underpinning of those boundaries. Like 
nature, subjectivity is an ideological fantasy, imagined and yet always absent. While not 
altogether obvious when applied to nature, Morton’s portrait of the subject shares more in 
common with psychoanalysis than ecocriticism. While he argues that the subject is always 
already a “potentially infinite series of alterities” he is also describing a traumatized subject, 
whose splintered identity is so shattered by events that s/he is unable to maintain a coherent 
narrative. “Wherever we look for the self we will not find it” (EWN 175,176; Žižek 180-1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 10 
 
I underline the destructive nuances in Morton’s account of subjectivity in order to 
contrast them to David Eng and David Kazanjian’s accounting of loss in the preface to the 
collection of essays they edited together entitled Loss: The Politics of Mourning.  Describing 
a series of photographs entitled In Between Days (Without You) by Dean Sameshina, they 
write 
‘In Between Days (Without You)’ thus offers a counterintuitive understanding of lost 
bodies, spaces, and ideals by configuring absence as a potential presence. Loss as a 
whole embraces this counterintuitive perspective. Instead of imputing to loss a 
purely negative quality, the essays in this collection apprehend it as productive rather 
than pathological, abundant rather than lacking, social rather than solipsistic, militant 
rather than reactionary…They insist that, if loss is known only by what remains of it, 
then the politics and ethics of mourning lie in the interpretation of what remains—
how remains are produced and animated, how they are read and sustained. (ix) 
While Morton disfigures the concept of the subject by deterritorializing it, Eng and 
Kazanjian’s definition liberates the category of loss by imbuing it with the possibility of 
political and ethical transformation. Without invoking the word, the authors are here seeking 
a redemption of the loss that comes to engulf what remains of the subject.  The longing 
which produces melancholy and all of its innumerable affects can be recuperated in some 
fashion. The lost object cannot be mimicked or reproduced, but there is an element of 
potential within this space of loss which can forge meaning. Eng and Kazanjian do not 
accept grief and loss as a series of symptoms to be overcome on the road to banality, but 
envision it as a way-of-being, an ethical and political act that can form the foundation of a 
life-philosophy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 11 
 
While both Morton on the one hand and Eng and Kazanjian on the other posit 
origins in the activity of tarrying with loss, they approach the problem from opposing 
directions, each account highlighting what in the other’s account is problematic. While 
Morton would perhaps be wary of any attempts at recuperating a positive meaning from 
melancholy, Eng and Kazanjian’s insistence on narrative interpretation makes plain what 
Morton refuses to account for: s/he who admits to being “a potentially infinite series of 
alterities” is in fact already psychotic (175).  But Eng and Kazanjian emphasize the 
production of meaning in a way very different from Morton. It may be, however their 
conscientious attention to loss and grief presents parallels to Morton’s dark ecology. In some 
ways, despite their differences these accounts are the other’s dialectical equivalent. While 
Eng and Kazanjian seek to mitigate the effects of trauma on vulnerable populations 
Morton’s work is directed at the gaze of the master, who is responsible for both human and 
ecological devastation. He seeks the reconnoitering of subjectivity in service of an ethical 
demand not unrelated to the ethico-political questions raised by Eng and Kazanjian. 
Because of Clare’s centrality to the dissertation’s argument, I take up his poetry and 
Morton’s reading of it in my first chapter, “From Her(e) to Eternity: Tracing Alterity 
through the Poetry of John Clare.” 4 This chapter sets up the theoretical stakes of the 
dissertation through the discussion of Morton’s theory of dark ecology, which he develops 
through his reading of John Clare’s poem “Lines: ‘I AM.’” He proposes a 
reconceptualization of nature, which rejects narratives of immersion “in” nature for a 
recognition of distance between the subject and nature. This unbreachable distance 
exemplifies the melancholia which, Morton argues, is fundamental to subjectivity and its 
relationship to a wider ecology of being.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 12 
 
Morton contrasts his reading of melancholy to Freud’s which defines it as a 
pathological illness, an over-extended and yet incomplete mourning.  He argues that this 
incompleteness is essential to the melancholic however, as it mirrors the ambivalence the 
subject feels in witnessing nature. For Morton, the absence the melancholic feels is 
fundamental to his/her subjectivity, “an irreducible component of subjectivity” (EWN 186, 
“Dark Ecology” 189). In making this argument, he draws on Lacan’s account of the 
Cartesian cogito, arguing that the stake of the cogito is less about a given mind-body duality 
and more of a cleavage between the psyche and the organic material that houses it. It is not 
an irrevocable separation of mind from body, but a recognition of the distance and absence 
that structures the relation of the subject and the environment in a way that informs each of 
the two terms. The psyche is thus a subject always-already in limbo. Affirming the distance 
or “gap” between subject and nature is not an act of or metaphysical dualism or willful 
ignorance but produces a “greater fidelity” to the breach that opens the subject’s relation to 
alterity (EWN 142). It recognizes our shared fragility and vulnerabilities, creating the strong 
ethical impulse that animates dark ecology. It produces an empathy which is not based on 
false identification but upon our inherent mutual fragility (EWN 168-9).   
After laying out the theoretical stakes of dark ecology, I extend Morton’s reading of 
“Lines: I AM,” to read Clare’s later lyrics. Although Clare’s oeuvre is decidedly pastoral, there 
are also texts which bear significant apocalyptic elements. I argue that the emergence of this 
parallels the dissolution of the speaker’s immersion fantasies, which results in the 
fragmenting of his identity as he envisions apocalyptic scenes. I trace this narrative through: 
“Lines: I AM,” the Sonnet: “I AM,” “A Vision,” “An Invite to Eternity,” “To Mary,” 
“Stanzas,” and “Song Last Day.” This is where my reading diverges from Morton’s work. 
While I produce a reading of Clare’s lyrics following the insights of dark ecology, Morton’s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 13 
 
own reading of “Lines” does not adequately attend to the figures of ambivalence and 
destruction which Clare employs in his representations of nature in the other lyrics. I 
propose that the melancholia we see in “Lines,” which is anchored by the speaker’s 
ambivalence, and finds comfort in nature, is less and less apparent over the course of the 
seven texts. His melancholia is displaced by a burgeoning psychosis which chooses instead to 
destroy the earth through a series of apocalyptic scenes in “A Vision,” “An Invite to 
Eternity,” and “Song Last Day.” As these readings and the remaining chapters of my 
dissertation demonstrate, dark ecology is a broad paradigm by which one can interpret lyrical 
responses to ecology and extend its implications.  
In my second chapter “‘Love is the Plan, The Plan is Death:’ Suicidal Ideation in 
Shelley’s Adonais,”5 I demonstrate that the scholarship which remains influential today in the 
pedagogy and literary criticism of Adonais obscures or minimizes the presence of suicidal 
elements in the text, causing it to be misread as an elegy that finally embraces life. I argue 
that an alternate set of criticism exists which in fact positions suicidal ideation as central to 
the text and which is, finally, more convincing than the tradition of criticism that has proven 
the more influential. I also draw on the recent work of R. Clifton Spargo, alongside Eng, and 
Kazanjian, to show why this line of Shelley criticism, one that takes the impress of 
melancholia seriously, is important to an understanding of the stakes of his poetry.  
I posit that in the effort to resuscitate the literary reputation of Percy Shelley in the 
late 1950’s, a reading of Adonais emerged, most notably by Earl Wasserman in The Subtler 
Language and Shelley: A Critical Reading, which, perhaps due to past accusations that Shelley 
was ‘effeminate’—Arnold’s “ineffectual angel”—tends to ‘overcorrect’ by presenting 
readings which are heteronormative and hyper-masculine. While this chapter could be 
accused of paying a lavish amount of attention to critics whose scholarship is less than 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 14 
 
recent, I chose to engage with this criticism because it still sets the tone of the readings of 
Shelley that have followed in its wake. The same year Wasserman published The Subtler 
Language, Harold Bloom remarked in his first book, Shelley’s Mythmaking, that the speaker of 
Adonais is in fact suicidal (SM 246). In the fifty-five years since, other critics have pursued 
readings of this theme but few use the word suicidal, instead couching the poet’s intentions 
in a language of despair or mourning. Ross Woodman (The Apocalyptic Vision in the Poetry of 
Shelley, 1964), Peter Sacks (The English Elegy, 1987) and William Ulmer ("Adonais and the 
Death of Poetry," 1993) are all exceptions that I engage with in my reading of the poem.  
The poet’s movement towards death is not a momentary gesture. He systematically narrates 
a literary evolution which culminates in an embrace of eternity, not a return to the earth.  
More particularly, I work through the ethical stakes of the poet’s preference for 
death through R. Clifton Spargo’s 2004 book Ethics of Mourning: Grief and Responsibility in 
Elegiac Literature. His work represents an important paradigm shift in literary criticism of the 
last twenty years. Influenced by the philosophical underpinnings of trauma studies, his work 
belongs to a growing group of scholarship on mental illness which has moved away from 
psychoanalysis towards a more synthetic approach informed by the fields of ethics and 
ecology. Spargo positions ethics as central to an understanding of grief through readings of 
Levinas and Bernard Williams (6). Drawing on his work, I argue that the poet’s suicidal 
ideation forges an ethics based on grief and desire. While the poet is mourning the loss of his 
friend, the grief he displays precedes this event. The speaker attributes the death of Adonais 
to a negative review which reveals his own deep-seated feelings of failure and longing. His 
turn to suicide is a response to the realization that he can no longer follow the ideological 
paradigm he espoused previous to the death of his fellow poet. His mourning becomes a 
contemplation of alterity as his melancholic fidelity to the world transfers into a desire for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 15 
 
union with the Eternal beyond the world and the preservation of his literary project. This 
preservation is essential to understanding the poet’s suicidal ideation: he does not conceive 
of his death as a destruction; it is an act of preservation in a narrative of melancholic 
resistance. The poet imagines his death not as an absence, but as a space of potential being. 
Reluctance by critics to account for the speaker’s suicidal ideation completely disfigures the 
text, eliding the elegy’s ethical valence. Readings of Adonais are at their best when they attend 
to the desire and the melancholy which operate at the heart of the text.  
The third chapter, “‘Dark Secrets Look for Light’ or Fragments Making Knowledge 
in the Poetry of Keats” is the first of two in which I explore the role of melancholia in the 
poetry of John Keats.6 I have structured the chapters around two key insights of the poet: 
his turn away from aesthetic ideology and his recognition of his melancholia as productive. 
In this first chapter I chart the poet’s struggle to understand the origins of his melancholia 
and its perpetuation through three texts: “On Seeing the Elgin Marbles,” “Epistle to John 
Reynolds,” and “Ode on a Grecian Urn.” While the “Ode on a Grecian Urn” is generally 
read by scholars through the frame of the other 1819 Odes, I situate it here to emphasize the 
poet’s dependence upon, then liberation from, aesthetic ideology. I further argue that the 
poet perceives his melancholia as caused by this ideology and his inability to succeed at his 
literary calling—poetry.  
While I cite the work of Theodor Adorno and Walter Benjamin throughout my 
dissertation, it is important to distinguish this work from my reading of aesthetic ideology in 
Keats’ poetry, which, as Kaufman notes, is often conflated with the work of Adorno and the 
Frankfurt School in general. My critique of aesthetic ideology adheres to the features 
Kaufman defines in the following way: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PREVIEW
 Bishop 16 
 
The critique of aesthetic ideology holds that high romantic poetics and Kantian 
aesthetics--building on eighteenth-century advances in bourgeois sociopolitical 
power—establish an essentialist or transcendental theory of cultural value. This is 
said to be an ideological theory whose function, enacted practically through 
literary/aesthetic experience and form, is to serve bourgeois hegemony by rerouting 
attention, interest, and energy from the sociopolitical to the artistic-cultural realm. 
(354)7 
Thus, aesthetic ideology operates as a social control which seeks to repress the 
transformative power inherent in aesthetic experience by delimiting it too narrowly. I deploy 
this concept in order to elaborate how Keats the poet is adversely influenced by the 
essentialist cultural mores which seek to minimize his divergent aesthetic experiences in the 
Elgin Marbles sonnet, the “Epistle to John Hamilton Reynolds,” and “Ode on a Grecian 
Urn.”  
I open the chapter with a reading of “Torso” from Walter Benjamin’s book One-Way 
Street as a way to frame the Keats’ attempt to move beyond aesthetic ideology through 
poetry. Benjamin compares a damaged fragment of a sculpture to the fragmentary nature of 
subjectivity, memory and history. Benjamin suggests a paradoxical construction: only by 
assuming that one’s past is an artificial figure without meaning, may s/he find the ability to 
“use it to full advantage in the present” and seek redemption (EBS 46).  The image of the 
damaged torso is a powerful figure for Keats’ own struggle in these lyrics to overcome the 
narrative artifice of the ideologies which burden him. In witnessing the mutilated bodies of 
the Elgin Marbles, the poet is confronted with a reminder of his own finite powers in the 
face of an artistic perfection at which he seems doomed to fail. The “Elgin” lyric 
communicates two lines of inquiry, neither of which the poet can resolve satisfactorily—the 